# **Title**

**iDentity-Biometric Face Recognition Time Management System**

# **Aim**

iDentity is a Python Django web application that uses machine learning
and facial recognition. This project seeks to invest in the growing
market for AI applications by developing a cloud-based facial
recognition system based on machine learning and deep learning. The
project aims to create a centralized facial recognition time management
system for targeting workplaces. The core of this project:

-   **Security** -- Ensure that data is delivered securely and that the
    programe is not utilized outside the company's PCs.

-   **Accuracy** - In order to minimize the risk of the software
    mismatching a user's face while also ensuring that it does so as
    correctly as possible, the purpose of this step is to guarantee
    that.

[Why was this form selected?]{.underline}

Like other biometrics systems, facial recognition technology analyses
and compares distinctive characteristics to identify or authenticate
users. Using a digital or networked camera, facial recognition software
may identify faces in photos, measure their characteristics, and then
compare them to templates that have already been stored in a database.
The wide range of potential uses for face-scanning biometric technology
demonstrates its versatility (Anon., 2022).

Facial recognition is a technology that has the capability to benefit
society by increasing safety and security, reducing crime, and removing
the need for human interaction. This project's main objective is to
provide a system that uses Biometric facial recognition technology to
simplify clocks in and out in a workplace. Completely automated and easy
to use and set up because, fully automated, we can eliminate human
error. Biometric face recognition is used extensively in various
contexts, including applications like Facebook or smartphones,
workplaces, airports, colleges, and banks. The use of facial recognition
software provides an extra layer of security for the workplace or
premises by making it possible to determine whether or not an
unauthorised person is present in a specific location. The third aim is
to improve and reduce administrative overload by tracking employees'
working hours, so we can see when an employee has finished on a specific
day. This cost-saving measure forbids false claims of hours worked, such
as overtime, instead of paying employees for falsely reported hours
worked.

The application will feature a front-end in which the admin can interact
so they can log in to the system. The system's administrator may add new
staff using a form or, under the visitor's menu option, can add
visitors. Admin can view details of employees and their details and also
what timetables are working. The front end will be linked to a back-end
database containing personnel data and face attributes.

# **Objectives**

This project's main objective is to construct a web application that
makes the workplace safe and straightforward to access without the need
for a key card, as well as to automate the login and log out and create
a more Covid-compliant workplace. And offering an automatic and
trustworthy Time management system that uses facial recognition
technology, human process mistakes may be reduced.

**The objectives of this project:**

-   To learn a new programming language Python

-   To improve my knowledge about machine learning and better understand
    how Biometric facial recognition works and how we can improve it.

-   To fully build and develop a professional web application with an
    inbuild facial recognition system

-   To understand the Django framework to build my project

-   And to improve my experience and knowledge of how to do academic
    research

**Achievable:**

1.  Launch the system and log in as the admin

2.  Log out of the system

3.  View employees in the system

4.  View employee timetables

5.  An administrator can add new employees to the system through a new
    employee form

6.  An administrator can add visitors to the system through the visitor
    form

7.  Warning message if an unauthorised person tries to access the
    building

8.  Employee hours worked or if they had worked overtime.

9.  Weekly reports on how many hours they worked that week to employees
    through email.

The application should meet the above objectives and goals to ensure the
companies have an easy-to-use Biometric Face Recognition Time Management
System.

# **Background**

Once, the only way to keep track of employee attendance was with pen and
paper sheets. Biometric attendance solutions are quickly becoming the
go-to tool for businesses that want to cut down on time theft and the
costs that come with it. Even though biometrics isn't a perfect answer,
the pros of a biometric time management system far outweigh any possible
cons (Anon., 2020). Also, we lived our life the last two years where we
were restricted because Covid 19 using the Biometric time management
system makes office space much more covid compliant and reduces the need
to use the keycard and fob system.

**Companies that work with Facial Recognition:**

-   Megvii, headquartered in Beijing, is the world's largest third-party
    authentication software provider. They do this by using their
    expertise in image recognition and deep learning software
    technology. Their main product, Face++, is the world's most popular
    open-source computer vision platform. Face++ employs cutting-edge
    biometric technology to recognise and analyse 106 facial data
    points. It supports a wide range of software development kits
    (SDKs), including PHP, Java, Python, iOS, and Ruby. It is often used
    by law enforcement to arrest criminals and analyse CCTV networks in
    urban areas (Anon., n.d.).

-   Cognitec is a German company that makes software and hardware for
    biometrics. It is a big company that makes face recognition software
    and services that can be used worldwide. Based on the widely used
    FaceVACS technology, they offer customised facial recognition
    solutions that are easy to use (Anon., n.d.).

-   Clear Secure: The biometric technology company Clear Secure offers
    members a secure identification and verification service. The secure
    identification platform CLEAR, the company's main product, is widely
    used at stadiums and airports. Large security check lines can be
    passed by members in under 5 minutes.

-   iProov is a cyber-security firm established in London that provides
    biometric authentication to its internet customers while maintaining
    high security, privacy, and usability. It is extensively utilised in
    various public and government sectors, financial institutions,
    digital identity providers, and travel companies, to name a few.
    iProov Face Verifier is a remote face verification authentication
    program that allows businesses to compare a user's face to a
    pre-enrolled biometric template (Anon., n.d.).

**What is the key benefit of the application:**

1.  High precision

Even if a biometric attendance system can't do anything else for you, it
can help you keep track of your employees' attendance and might be worth
the price of admission by itself. Because there are so many different
biometric markers, it is tough for someone to fake their attendance
(Anon., 2020).

2.  Can simplify payroll

Biometric attendance systems can make this service easier by turning it
into an automated process that doesn't cost anything extra and is just
as accurate as its original tracking functions (Anon., 2020).

3.  No need for physical contact

It can help businesses stop the spread of infections or viruses and
recognise staff members wearing masks (Anon., 2020).

4.  Enhance security in the workplace

As mentioned earlier, a Biometric face attendance system can enhance
security through the camera.

**The biggest issue with Biometric systems**

1.  The process of collecting biometric data and mapping it to identity
    is the biggest obstacle (Anon., 2019).

2.  The primary concern with the biometric approach is privacy. (Anon.,
    2019)

3.  If the information is hacked even once, it might result in various
    negative outcomes (Anon., 2019).

4.  It is expensive, and other expenses are related to setting up,
    running, and maintaining the system (Anon., 2019).

# **Research Approach**

The first question in this project is how I can do it and what I need to
do to make it happen because this is a new technology that we did not
cover in college, so I need to do a few crash courses to take the
challenge. I need to research what APIs are out there that can make
project development much more manageable.

**Technologies & Concept**

1.  **Django**

Web applications may be developed with Django and launched in a couple
of hours. Django handles a lot of the difficulty associated with web
development, allowing you to concentrate on developing your app without
having to create the wheel. It is open source and free (Anon., 2019).
Django was created to make it as simple as possible for developers to
create applications from scratch (Anon., 2019).

![](media/image1.png){width="4.458333333333333in"
height="3.1458333333333335in"} (Anon., n.d.)

The above image shows the Django framework I like to use for my project.

2.  **Python**

Python is simple to use, simple to understand, and adaptable. It
indicates that Python, a programming language used to build machine
learning, may be utilised with any operating system, including Windows,
Linux, Unix, and macOS (Kumar, 2021). The Python library offers
fundamental components, so programmers don't always have to start from
scratch. Python libraries enable you to access, handle, and manipulate
your data, which is necessary for machine learning (Kumar, 2021).

3.  **OpenCV**

It is a free and open-source library of computer vision and machine
learning software (Anon., n.d.). The collection contains more than 2500
optimised algorithms, including several both established and
cutting-edge computer vision and machine learning methods. These
algorithms may be used to identify landscapes, detect related images in
an image database, erase red eyes from flash shots, track eye movements,
and create overlay markers. Additionally, they can be used to recognise
faces and detect objects, classify human actions in videos, track camera
movements, track moving objects, extract 3D models of objects, create 3D
point clouds from stereo cameras, stitch images together to create
high-resolution images of entire scenes, and extract 3D models of
objects (Anon., n.d.).

4.  **Trust 720P HD camera**

HD camera with inbuild microphone for image recognition for the project

**Grant Chart**

![](media/image2.png){width="6.260416666666667in" height="3.59375in"}

# **Potential Outcomes**

This project's potential outcomes are developing a user-friendly web app
for small businesses to manage and automate their clock in and out and
enhance their security.

# **Bibliography**

Anon., 2019. *Django overview \| Django.* \[Online\]\
Available at:
[https://www.djangoproject.com/start/overview/]{.underline}\
\[Accessed 2 October 2022\].

Anon., 2019. *Nutech Pros and Cons of Biometrics:.* \[Online\]\
Available at:
[http://www.nutechsolution.com/pros-cons-biometrics/]{.underline}\
\[Accessed 1 october 2022\].

Anon., 2020. *The 8 Main Advantages of Biometric Attendance Systems -
NCheck Bio Attendance.* \[Online\]\
Available at:
[https://www.ncheck.net/biometric-attendance-systems-advantages]{.underline}\
\[Accessed 01 October 2022\].

Anon., 2022. *Biometric Facial Recognition - FindBiometrics.*
\[Online\]\
Available at:
[https://findbiometrics.com/solutions/facial-recognition/]{.underline}\
\[Accessed 30 September 2022\].

Anon., n.d. *About.* \[Online\]\
Available at:
[https://opencv.org/about/#:\~:text=OpenCV%20(Open%20Source%20Computer%20Vision,perception%20in%20the%20commercial%20products.]{.underline}\
\[Accessed 2 10 2022\].

Anon., n.d. *Facial Recognition Market Top Companies \| Facial
Recognition Companies Revenue by 2028.* \[Online\]\
Available at:
[https://www.emergenresearch.com/blog/top-10-leading-facial-recognition-companies-in-the-world]{.underline}\
\[Accessed 19 10 2022\].

Anon., n.d. *MDN Web Docs Django introduction.* \[Online\]\
Available at:
[https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Django/Introduction]{.underline}\
\[Accessed 2 10 2022\].

Kumar, S., 2021. *Why Python is Best for AI, ML, and Deep Learning.*
\[Online\]\
Available at:
[https://www.rtinsights.com/why-python-is-best-for-ai-ml-and-deep-learning/#:\~:text=The%20Python%20library%20provides%20base]{.underline}\
\[Accessed 2 10 2022\].
